ELSEVIER Gene 179 (1996) 53-57
GENE
AN INTERNATIONAL OOURhlAL ON
GENES AND GENOHES
Redox signaling and gene control in the Escherichia coli soxRS oxidative
stress regulon- a review i
Abstract
Bruce Demple *
Department of Molecular and Cellular Toxicology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA
The soxRS regulon of Escherichia coli coordinates the induction of at least twelve genes in response-to-superoxide or nitric
oxide. This review describes recent progress in understanding the signal-transduction and transcriptional-control mechanisms that
activate the soxRS regulon, and some aspects of the physiological functions of this system. The SoxS protein represents a growing
family of transcription activators that stimulate genes for resistance to oxidative stress and antibiotics. SoxR is an unusual
transcription factor whose activity in vitro can be switched off by the removal of [2Fe-2S] centers, and activated by their
reinsertion. The activated form of SoxR remodels the structure of the soxS promoter to activate transcription. When the soxRS
system is activated, bacteria gain resistance to oxidants, antibiotics and immune cells that generate nitric oxide. The latter features
could increase the success (virulence) of some bacterial infections.
1. Introduction and background
Multiple defenses protect aerobic organisms from the
toxic side-effects of oxygen. For example, superoxide
dismutases eliminate O2-, and catalases dispose of
hydrogen peroxide. Such defenses can be adjusted in
response to imbalances between the production and
disposal of reactive oxygen derivatives (often called
'oxidative stress'; Sies, 1991). Escherichia coli has inde-
pendent multigene responses to two kinds of oxidative
stress (Demple, 1991; Hidalgo and Demple, 1995): excess
H2O 2 triggers the oxyR regulon, and excess O2- or
nitric oxide (NO') radicals triggers the soxRS regulon,
which coordinates the transcriptional induction of at
least 12 promoters (Hidalgo and Demple, 1995).
* Tel.: (+ 1-617) 432-3462; Fax: (+ 1-617) 432-0377;
e-mail: demple@mbcrr.harvard.edu
1Presented at the Chulabhorn Research Institute International
Conference on 'Biotechnology and Research Applications for
Sustainable Development (BRASD)', Central Plaza Hotel, Bangkok,
Thailand, 7-10 August 1995.
magnetic resonance; FeS, iron-sulfur; kb, kilobase(s) or 1000 bp; nt,
nucleotide(s); soxRS regulon, genes regulated by products (SoxR and
SoxS) of the soxRS locus in E. coli; soxS' i : lacZ, fusion of lacZ to the
5' portion of soxS and its promoter.
0378-1119/96/$15.00 © 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved
PH $0378-1119(96)00329-0
We have focused on the soxRS regulon to identify key
defense functions, and as a model signal-transduction
pathway for oxidative stress. Specific antioxidant roles
are apparent for many known soxRS-regulated genes
(Table 1). Activation of the soxRS regulon also confers
resistance to a broad range of antibiotics (Greenberg
et al., 1990; Chou et al., 1993), and two known soxRS-
regulated genes encode proteins prevent antibiotics from
accumulating in E. coli (Table 1).
Gene activation by soxRS occurs in two stages
(Nunoshiba, 1992; Wu and Weiss, 1992): SoxR protein
is activated by a redox signal as a strong activator of
soxS transcription; increased SoxS levels then activate
the various regulon genes via ~7o RNA polymerase
(Fig. 1). The focus of this paper is the mechanism of
these two transcriptional stages, and the role of soxRS
in resistance to the oxidative assault of immune cells.
2. Activation of soxRS regulon genes
2.1. SoxS and a family of antibiotic-resistance activators
SoxS protein was purified to reveal a protein with
high-affinity binding (50% binding at 10 -s to 10 -9 M
54 B. Demple/Gene 179 (1996) 53-57
Table 1
Genes of the soxRS regulon and their proposed functions (Hidalgo and Demple, 1995) a
Gene b Product Activity Role
sodA Mn-SOD Superoxide dismutase
nfo Endonuclease-IV Initiates repair of oxidative
DNA damages
zwf Glucose-6-phosphate Generates NADPH
dehydrogenase
fumC Fumarase C Heat-stable fumarase
acn Aconitase Citric acid cycle
sol (Japan) Homolog? .9
psi (S. Korea) Homolog? ?
micF Antisense RNA for ompF mRNA Block OmpF synthesis
acrAB AcrA and AcrB Efltux pump(s) in inner membrane
fpr Fpr Frredoxin:NADPH oxidoreductase
a Not shown are several other soxRS-regulated genes not yet cloned or analyzed biochemically.
b See Figs. 1 and 2 for mechanism of induction of these genes.
..Le.dox.. ,.
~ signal
',' ®
SOXI( P
i soxS
sodA nfo micF zwf famC acnA fpr others
,, , | ', ,, ,, ,
: 1 1
Mn-SOD Endo IV OmpF G6PD fumarase aconitase ferredoxin reductase
Fig. 1. Two-stage transcriptional induction in the soxRS regulon.
Existing SoxR protein is activated by an intracellular redox signal
caused by excess superoxide or nitric oxide. Activated SoxR stimulates
transcription at the soxS promoter, and the increased levels of SoxS
protein activate the regulon genes. Note that SoxS also negatively
autoregulates its own expression, and that the soxR and soxS mRNAs
overlap. Mn-SOD, manganese-containing superoxide dismutase; Endo
IV, endonuclease IV; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. See
Table 1 for a more complete list of soxRS regulon genes and their
proposed functions. Reprinted with permission from Hidalgo and
Demple (1995).
SoxS) to soxRS regulon promoters (Li and Demple,
1994). SoxS binding stabilizes the subsequent binding of
E. coli cy v° RNA polymerase by 10- to 20-fold (Li and
Demple, 1994), similar to the in vivo induction for
several genes (Greenberg et al., 1990; Tsaneva and
Weiss, 1990).
SoxS is homologous to the AraC C-terminus
Keep O~ - levels low
Viability, genetic stability
Supply reducing power for
antioxidant enzymes
Replace O~ --sensitive fumarases
Replace aconitase inactivated by O~ -
?
9
Diminish uptake of antibiotics and other compounds
Maintain low intracellular levels of
antibiotics and other compounds
Reduce FeS clusters
(Amfibile-Cuevas and Demple, 1991), but more closely
related proteins have been discovered recently (Fig. 2).
These include the 13-kDa MarA protein (Cohen et al.,
1993), whose regulatory specificity overlaps that of SoxS
(Ariza et al., 1995), and the 33-kDa Rob protein, with
an homologous N-terminus (Skarstad et al., 1993; Cohen
et al., 1993). Rob was identified by its binding to the
right arm of the E. coli replication origin (Skarstad et al.,
1993); we tested whether the sequence similarity of Rob,
MarA and SoxS might underlie a regulatory overlap
among these proteins.
Expression of Rob via a lacI-regulated promoter
elevated the expression of the fumC and soda genes and
conferred resistance to multiple antibiotics in E. coli
(Ariza et al., 1995). Purified Rob protein bound in vitro
with high affinity to the sodA, micF, and zwf promoters,
although zwf was not significantly activated by Rob in
vivo (Ariza et al., 1995). The gene activations seen with
intact Rob in vivo were also mediated by expression of
only the N-terminal segment of Rob (Fig. 2). Both Rob
and SoxS have recently been implicated in resistance to
organic solvents and toxic heavy metals (Nakajima et al.,
1995), which might involve still other genes yet to be
identified. Physiological signals that might activate Rob
expression or a latent transciptional activity in pre-
existing Rob protein remain unknown.
2.2. Physiology of soxRS: activation of resistance to nitric
oxide-generating macrophages
The O~ - (superoxide) radical is an ion that penetrates
membranes poorly. However, other biologically gener-
ated radicals, most notably nitric oxide (NO'), do cross
lipid bilayers. NO is generated in short bursts for
intercellular signaling, or in a more sustained fashion by
some immune cells as a cytotoxic weapon (Nathan and
Xie, 1994). We found recently (Nunoshiba et al., 1993)
B. Demple/Gene 179 (1996) 53-57 55
N-terminus HTH motif
C-terminus
~'/////~//~/////////S/A
I
I
I
I
I f
180 aa ~ 100 aa ~ 180 aa
I Rob
Name % Id.
TetD 60
SoxS 55
MarA 51
] Cafl R 46
[ AflR 46
RhaS 31
AraC 26
Fig. 2. Family of SoxS- and Rob-related proteins. The percent aa sequence identity (% Id.) of the various polypeptides was calculated relative to
Rob for the central hatched areas. The right hatched areas show a common region among Rob and two other proteins which is not shared with
the other proteins. The vertical arrow indicates the site of truncation used to generated the Rob N-terminal fragment (see Section 2.1)). HTH,
predicted helix-turn-helix motif. The proteins (SoxS, MarA, Rob, etc.) are named after their respective genes. Reproduced with permission from
Ariza et al. (1995).
that acute exposure to pure NO" activates the soxRS
regulon in a manner independent from O~-, and that
the soxRS regulon provides a survival advantage for E.
coli after phagocytosis by murine macrophages. This
increased survival was seen only after > 4 h of phagocy-
tosis, when NO" is being generated at a high rate
(Nathan and Xie, 1994).
The simplest conclusion from the above experiments
was that NO" activates the soxRS regulon, which then
provides resistance to the NO'-mediated toxicity. Even
though O~- generated extracellularly did not activate
soxRS (Nunoshiba et al., 1993), it remained formally
possible that the regulon was somehow activated at an
earlier stage after phagocytosis, but with a contribution
to survival that appeared only later on. We investigated
this point in two ways: by testing soxRS activation by
chronic NO" exposure, similar to that occurring in
macrophages, and by directly measuring the induction
of the soxS gene in phagocytosed bacteria (Nunoshiba
et al., 1995).
With chronic NO" exposure, maximal induction of a
soxS': :lacZ operon fusion was seen at 25 ~tM/h anaero-
bically and 125 ~tM/h aerobically (an expected difference,
since 02 neutralizes NO'). The activation of the same
operon fusion was followed in E. coli phagocytosed by
murine macrophages, except that the sensitivity of the
assay for 13-galactosidase had to be boosted ~ 1000-fold
(Nunoshiba et al., 1995). These studies reinforced the
connection to nitric oxide considerably: no soxS'::lacZ
induction was detectable at 4 h after phagocytosis, but
by 8 h the expression had been elevated more than
30-fold. Most strikingly, incubation of the macrophages
with an arginine analog that blocks NO" synthesis also
prevented soxS activation. Consequently, E. coIi has
evolved to sense and respond to a major cytotoxic
weapon of the immune system. It remains to be seen
whether such a function is widespread among bacteria
or whether eukaryotic cells harbor such protective
responses against NO. However, there is preliminary
evidence for close homologs of soxR and soxS in several
pathogenic species of bacteria (E. Martins and B.D.,
unpublished data).
2.3. SoxR: sensing and transcription-activation by an FeS
protein
Genetic studies have shown that soxR is the master
regulator of the soxRS regulon by governing activation
of the soxS gene (Nunoshiba et al., 1993; Wu and Weiss,
1992). The direct role of the SoxR protein in this process
was shown by the purification of SoxR and the demon-
stration of its specific and high-affinity binding (K d
approx. 4× 10 -l° M) to the soxS promoter (Hidalgo
and Demple, 1994). SoxR could be obtained in two
forms, dependent on the amount of thiol present in the
purification buffers (included initially in attempts to
modify the oxidation state of the protein): SoxR purified
in the absence of added thiols contained 1-2 atoms of
Fe per monomer, while protein isolated in buffers con-
taining 1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol contained no detecta-
ble metals (Hidalgo and Demple, 1994). Both forms of
SoxR bound the soxS promoter equally strongly, with
only Fe-SoxR slightly stabilizing the subsequent binding
of E. coli cy 7° RNA polymerase (Hidalgo and Demple,
1994<). However, only Fe-SoxR stimulated abortive
initiation at the soxS promoter in vitro; apo-SoxR was
without a significant effect (Hidalgo and Demple, 1994).
We have confirmed the transcriptional-activity of
Fe-SoxR using a more physiological assay for full-length
soxS transcription from a plasmid containing a compet-
56 B. Demple/Gene 179 (1996) 53-57
ing promoter (bla) not regulated by soxRS. These studies
revealed potent activity of Fe-SoxR specific for soxS
transcription, while the activity of apo-SoxR was < 1%
that of the metalloprotein (Hidalgo et al., 1995).
Footprinting studies with Cu(II).5-phenyl-l,10-phe-
nanthroline showed that Fe-SoxR specifically stimulates
open complex formation, with the some indication that
protein distorts the local DNA structure in partnership
with RNA polymerase (Hidalgo et al., 1995). Allosteric
DNA distortion may be the mechanism by which
Fe-SoxR overcomes the non-optimal -10/-35 spacing
of the soxS promoter (19 bp; Hidalgo and Demple,
1994<) to activate transcription, as has been proposed
for the homologous MerR protein (Ansari et al., 1992).
The signaling mechanism that connects soxS induc-
tion, via SoxR, to superoxide or nitric oxide stress has
been explored by physical studies of the SoxR FeS
center. This metal center has now been shown by electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to be a
[2Fe-2S] cluster, at a stoichiometry of one cluster per
SoxR monomer (Hidalgo et al., 1995). Since Fe-SoxR
(and apo-SoxR) exist predominantly as homodimers in
solution (Hidalgo et al., 1995), there must be two
[2Fe-2S] centers per functional molecule, although we
could not distinguish whether these are arranged as one
per subunit or two shared between the subunits. This
physical picture of the SoxR metalloprotein is consistent
with that determined by others (Wu et al., 1995).
The SoxR FeS centers are redox-active, as shown by
reduction with dithionite (Hidalgo and Demple, 1994 <),
which generates the reduced (Fe 2+/Fe 3+ ) form (Hidalgo
et al., 1995; Wu et al., 1995). It seems possible that
oxidation/reduction reactions could control the tran-
scriptional activity of SoxR. The protein with oxidized
(Fe 3 +/Fe 3 + ) centers was the active form in transcription
studies cited above, but preliminary experiments (E.
Hidalgo and B.D., in preparation) suggest that reduction
of the [2Fe-2S] centers does not block transcription
activation by Fe-SoxR.
An alternative possibility is that SoxR activity is
regulated by the assembly and disassembly of the
[2Fe-2S] centers. We have now shown that metallo-
SoxR can be reconstituted in vitro by incubation with
inorganic sulfide, iron and dithiothreitol (Hidalgo and
Demple, 1996). The transcription-activating potency of
the reconstituted Fe-SoxR is equal to that of the native
metalloprotein, and the [2Fe-2S] structure was con-
firmed by EPR spectroscopy. However, successful recon-
stitution under these conditions required several hours.
The rate of FeS assembly into SoxR was accelerated
> 25-fold by the addition of Azotobacter vinlandii NifS
protein (a generous gift of Drs. L. Zheng and D. Dean),
a sulfide-generating enzyme that catalyzes the reconstitu-
tion of FeS centers (Zheng and Dean, 1994). Thus, fully
active SoxR can be generated rapidly from the apo-
protein, which demonstrates that only the lack of the
[2Fe-2S] clusters prevents transcriptional activation by
apo-SoxR (Hidalgo and Demple, 1996).
The key role of the SoxR cysteine residues in anchor-
ing the [2Fe-2S] centers in SoxR has been demonstrated
by generating mutant forms of the protein. Site-specific
mutation of any of the four SoxR Cys ~ Ala generates
derivatives that failed to complement AsoxR strains for
induction of a soxS'::lacZ reporter fusion in response
to paraquat (T.M. Bradley, E. Hidalgo, H. Ding and
B.D., data not shown). Although they bound the soxS
promoter with apparently normal affinity, the purified
Cys ~ Ala mutant SoxR proteins failed to activate in
vitro transcription and did not contain Fe (or other
metals). Again, the simplest interpretation is that the
activity of SoxR is allosterically modulated to affect a
stage after DNA-binding, and that the [2Fe-2S] clusters
play the critical role in this process.
If oxidation-reduction reactions at the SoxR [2Fe-2S]
do not act as a simple 'on/off' switch, it seems possible
that the in vivo activity of SoxR could be modulated by
the assembly and disassembly of the FeS centers. How
might this be linked to oxidative stress to allow SoxR
to act as a sensor? Both superoxide and nitric oxide
seem to lead to the destruction of protein [4Fe-4S]
clusters (Flint et al., 1993; Henry et al., 1993). These
reactions both inactivate [4Fe-4S] enzymes and liberate
low-molecular-weight forms of Fe (Henry et al., 1993).
This liberated iron might then provide a pool for assem-
bly into SoxR, which should activate the protein as a
transcription factor. The characteristics of the SoxR FeS
center seem to be well-suited to its demonstrated ability
to function in the presence of free radicals that inactivate
other FeS proteins: Fe-SoxR is stable during long-term
exposure to oxygen (Hidalgo and Demple, 1994), unlike
many proteins with [4Fe-4S] clusters but similar to
some other [2Fe-2S] proteins (Flint et al., 1993).
The hypothesis that SoxR activation might be linked
to cellular iron pools resolves some difficulties in under-
standing this system. For example, both 02- and
NO" activate soxRS even though they have rather
different chemical reactivities. However, this explanation
raises new questions: What would prevent [2Fe-2S]
assembly into SoxR in non-stressed cells, since FeS
centers are certainly assembled into other proteins? How
would active Fe-SoxR be converted to the inactive form?
Is there a specific FeS assembly or disassembly protein
for SoxR? Do limitations of Fe availability block SoxR
activation? Such questions are among the key ones to
be addressed in the next stage of exploring the sensing
and gene activation mechanism of this fascinating
protein.
2.4. Conclusions and perspectives
The soxRS regulon provides a powerful model system
for understanding the mechanisms that link toxic expo-
sure to free radicals and genetic responses that
counteract them. The arrangement of two stages of
transcription-activation remains enigmatic, although it
could provide a means of coupling the unconventional
SoxR gene activation mechanism to the more standard
mechanism that seems to be employed by SoxS. Such
an arrangement may also be more amenable to regula-
tory overlap with other control systems at individual
soxRS regulon genes.
Our studies of soxRS have also revealed some features
with medical implications. The antibiotic resistance con-
ferred by soxRS suggests that some of the same functions
could operate to counteract compounds that cause oxi-
dative stress. The clear homology of SoxS and MarA
suggests that these two proteins operate by a similar
mechanism to activate some of the same genes, and our
biochemical studies with the SoxS protein provide a
clear guide for future work with MarA. The activation
of soxRS by NO and by nitric-oxide-generating macro-
phages suggests that this defense system could play a
role in bacterial pathogenesis, a question that we are
currently exploring. In addition, the identification of
soxRS-regulated genes that confer resistance to NO"
points to the types of defenses that might operate in
other organisms, including human cells and tissues that
generate NO.
Acknowledgement
Research in the author's laboratory has been sup-
ported by the National Cancer Institute of the National
Institutes of Health, by the American Cancer Society,
and by the Amyotropic Lateral Sclerosis Association. I
am grateful to the talented students and postdoctoral
fellows, who have conducted this work, for many stimu-
lating discussions.
References
Am~ibile-Cuevas, C.F. and Demple, B. (1991) Molecular characteriza-
tion of the soxRS genes of Escherichia coli: two genes control a
superoxide stress regulon. Nucleic Acids Res. 19, 4479-4484.
underwinding is a critical step in positive control of transcription by
Hg-MerR. Nature 355, 87-89.
multiple antibiotic resistance and binding of stress-inducible promot-
ers by Escherichia coli Rob protein. J. Bacteriol. 177, 1655-1661.
